Are you-- Please come to the-
Super Liquor. Yes
... come to the guest room.
Now, first of all, thank you for-
Being here
... well, coming here and presenting early.
This is a very efficient committee.
Excellent.
And so we were just poised and waiting for someone to turn up,
so we're so glad you took the opportunity.
Yeah.
We've got 10 minutes with you.
Fantastic.
Now everyone's read the submission, so-
Fantastic
... you do not need to verbatim go through them-
No
... because much more productive we can answer some questions.
Perfect.
Well, then. So.
Excellent. Thanks for your time. My name is Morgan McCann, Chief Executive
Officer of Super Liquor. I
raised my family in Rima's electorate, and my sons are going to beat
a team from Andrew's electorate in rugby on Saturday, so.
You reckon?
Yes, absolutely. Yeah.
Which-- Who are they playing?
They're playing Waiuku.
Very good.
Steven Donald's team. So
I'm the CEO of New Zealand's largest New Zealand-owned retail liquor network
that makes us the biggest reseller of liquor outside of the three
supermarket brands in New Zealand.
This is Liz.
Yes, I'm Liz Reid, and I work with Super Liquor around the
public policy space.
So we've got 200 stores from Kaitaia to Invercargill.
Within that, 115 franchisee shareholders.
So we've got a unique business model that our franchisees are shareholders of Super
Liquor. They are small to medium business owners, mostly families,
that can operate one or a number of stores throughout the country.
So there's two things that really matter most to us at Super
Liquor. Doing the right thing by the communities we're part of and by the law
to sell and supply alcohol, and we've done that responsibly for
31 years now. And also respecting a licensing
system that is fair and consistent across the board.
We'd really love to see a sort of level playing field towards that licensing of
alcohol in New Zealand. That's why we support the aims of the amendment bill
that's in place to reduce red tape, bring more fairness,
certainty, and consistency to the licensing system without
compromising the key purpose of the act, which is to reduce alcohol-related
harm.
Our store owners have seen firsthand inconsistencies,
the costs, and in many cases, the nonsensical
impacts of the current licensing system.
The system has become incredibly inefficient and
unwieldy, not just for us as business operators and license holders,
but for councils, for licensing agencies, public
health services, and the police.
That's why we're really pleased to support the proposals in the Amendment bill that
will deal with some of these challenges.
But you will have also seen in our submission that we've proposed three additional
amendments beyond what's currently in the bill.
We believe these
amendments would be absolute game changers, and they'd also
be very simple to execute as part of the bill.
And those changes are making it harder for poor retail
operators to get into the industry and hold a
license. We refer to that as a social license also, and
easier for those poor operators to move
out of the industry or lose their
licenses. We also believe that standardizing
off-license trading hours for both supermarkets
and liquor retail across the country from 9
a.m. to 9 p.m.
would be useful and provide that level playing field we are looking for.
It will also stop the current practice we are seeing where there are
many customers driving from district to district to buy
alcohol past 9 p.m. at night due to the current LAP laws
in place in some of the main centers.
And furthermore, we would welcome the change to 9 p.m.
because we sincerely believe that it will protect the well-being and
safety of our staff and stores not being open later than
that.
We also recommend
that we completely prohibit same-day deliveries of alcohol
that's purchased online to stop
spur-of-the-moment purchasing and this notion
of rapid deliveries altogether. So we believe a planned
alcohol purchase made at a licensed premise, whether that is an
off license or on license, is a responsible and planned
purchase. And opening the gate to
more irregularities around rapid delivery
is not something we should
widen the possibility of.
And then finally, putting an end to the onerous license conditions that our
franchisees have to deal with that aren't supported by harm
reduction evidence,
that often exceed the scope of the act and needlessly drive cost up,
not just for our store owners, but for taxpayers, councils, and
ratepayers.
So we strongly believe that with these additional changes, the--
without those, the bill will miss its opportunity to deliver on its
objectives and for this Parliament to truly make a difference for
local businesses and local communities with an Amendment bill.
There's an opportunity for us all to raise the bar, excuse the pun, for
alcohol retail standards so that the rogues are kept
out. We do away with wildly varying local licensing
conditions that complicate the business of selling liquor
without any focus on reducing alcohol
harm.And we could then properly deal with things like
opening the gate for spur of the moment liquor deliveries
and purchases, as well as late-night home deliveries.
So in our submission, we detail a strong case for these
changes,
but we think it's probably more helpful in the meantime to have a
few minutes with yourselves, answer any of those proposals.
Right. Look, I'm going to go with Mr.
Tom Rutherford, and then I'll go to Dan.
Thank you, Chair. I've just got a couple of questions.
Firstly, I thought it was a really balanced submission, so thank you for the
way it was put together and presented in that way.
That's you, Lads, isn't it?
Maybe.
Couple of questions. The rapid delivery part.
Mm-hmm.
Do Super Liquor do rapid delivery through Uber Eats or
any of the equivalent?
We've got a pilot at the moment with about four stores.
Mm-hmm.
Through Uber Eats?
Through a third provider.
Yeah, okay.
Third-party provider.
Okay, thank you. And then on the objections to
the premises one. So for example, we've seen many occasions
where people from Wanaka have complained-
Mm
... about proposals in Auckland and et cetera.
Mm-hmm.
I'm not picking on Wanaka, but that's just the example.
You support the intention, but you want it reduced from a kilometer to 500
meters. Firstly, explain why that's the case.
Yeah. So at the moment,
anyone can obtain a license.
Yeah.
Regardless of where you-
So one kilometer is already better than the current status quo, correct?
Oh, yeah. Absolutely.
Yes, one kilometer is better.
Mm-hmm.
But still, there would be nuances like the Auckland CBD, where one kilometer would
cover a huge amount of people-
Mm-hmm
... and population, as well as a huge amount of different liquor
licenses.
Mm-hmm.
So we think you could go to 500 meters.
Could be 500 meters in a metro area, it could be a kilometer in a regional
area.
Okay. In the same breath, though, you then oppose
those who reside, the phrasing "reside
or has an office or a place of business." You oppose that
language because you say it should only be if they reside there, not their
place of business.
It was more that there was a contradiction between the notion of a
one-kilometer radius and somebody who
resides, and there was a contradiction between those two
clauses in the
bill.
Yeah.
And it was about
reducing that
ability for there to be a misunderstanding,
and for it to be really clear and consistent.
So could clarity be in the fact that you could just refine the wording
to say their residential address and remove-
Yes
... any other option for-
Absolutely
... a business or where they operate?
Correct.
Thank you.
Right. Kevin, Dan. You go.
Thanks, Chair. So the issue I have with this bill is
the shifting in the balance of power, and large
retail networks are able to invest heavily in
legal advice and submissions like this.
And I suppose how do we ensure that smaller community voices
are not crowded out by well-resourced
commercial interests in that licensing process?
Yeah, we encourage communities to have their
say. We want them to have that say, but we want it to be the true
community. And we support all of our small businesses
through that process.
But there's nothing stopping any small business from
representing themselves in that environment.
We see that play out regularly, and we're not suggesting a change to
that.
But we would just like to see the
boundaries
more realistic.
But do you accept that there's an imbalance in who has the
resources to participate in that process
with those licensing decisions?
I think it would be
inaccurate to suggest that all licensed
operators have the resources to
get legal representation in front of a DLC,
and that certainly doesn't happen all the time.
And obviously you think about the
cost of attaining and
retaining a license. If it
requires legal counsel to be able to do that, that's a
cost that
hasn't always been
a cost that businesses have had to bear.
But with the sort of creep of
license conditions that have been
suggested by
the reporting agencies to the DLC,
they've been forced into a position where they've had to get
legal assistance. But it's not a cost that they
necessarily have the means to always bear.
And in fact, a lot of licensed operators accept
conditions that are outside the scope of the act or
they're not supported by harm reduction evidence because they
simply haven't got the means to argue against
them.
We have very realistic examples of small business owners that have
invested thousands of dollars in their own money to
have their licenses reissued with a clean track record that have taken
between 18 and 24 months.
That's right.
Now, we as a Super Liquor master franchise don't support them financially in
that. That's all off their own back.
Yeah.
And Honorable Doctor. Dan. Just a moment. I've got questions everywhere.
I did have one more small.
You all right? Over to you, Honorable Doctor.
Okay. Come back to you?
Yeah.
Okay. So, it's a pretty basic rule
that you can't sell alcohol to someone who's intoxicated.
Mm.
Right?
How
are you going to manage that with rapid deliveries?
Well,
we don't want to.
No.
And we're saying the best example here in our submission is to
get rid of rapid deliveries.
Just have-- So-
You can't-- You must have a six-hour delay between ordering and
delivery or something, right?
Not same day.
No?
Different day.
Different day. But follow up.
Sorry, this just screams of protectionism.
But yeah, so you're saying not the same day.
Exactly, if I order at 11:59, is it okay if it's delivered
the next day? I mean-
Well, we're saying that purchases of liquor, whether it be from
a cell door in a winery or a supermarket, you can deliver it one
day and get it delivered the next.
Yeah, but how are you defining a day?
Well, no. Well-
Because the same-
We can talk about that
... the legislation says it's two hours.
But no. The idea that there must be at least a period of
time between ordering and delivering.
Yeah. You could say 24 hours if you like.
Okay. Cool. Right. Lawrence, Dr. Soon-Iang.
Sorry, could I just comment on the...
It's not a protectionist mo-
Well-
The intention is to
protect both the person delivering the alcohol-
Right
... and to remove the opportunity
for people to be opportunistic in the way that they purchase alcohol.
But with all due respect, I could taxi down to one of your outlets myself.
But then I pour you and go, "You're drunk."
But then we eyeball you and we're able to make a decision about whether you are-
Well, that's right. But in the bill, there is extra, and you said
you support those, extra
ID checks, et cetera, at the point of delivery.
Yeah.
So they're not, uh-
But we think it could go further and just get rid of rapid delivery.
Very difficult to-
Yeah, but I'm just
calling out that if I taxi, you're okay with that.
Right. We'll go to Dr. Soon-Iang.
Thank you. I actually do have a question around this because the legislation says
it has to be within two hours. But I guess the question is, when you go into
a physical store, first of all, today we've heard a suite of bills and et cetera,
that could prevent a physical shop from denying service
to a particular person because they have to walk in.
Mm-hmm.
Whereas what I'm not seeing here is you have to
verify if the person's not a minor or intoxicated.
Mm-hmm.
But you could be like, "I'm only interacting with this person for two seconds.
They're dropping things off." I'll just
tidy myself up for two seconds and then grab it, right?
And that's also based on people who need to be trained to be
able to deliver alcohol as well. So I guess the question
is,
what then is there
to ensure that you're not perpetuating, with the rapid
delivery, alcohol harm?
There isn't anything.
There isn't. There isn't anything.
Because can I just check as a supplementary, and genuinely, I don't
know this,
for someone who's an abuser of alcohol and et cetera,
is there any current mechanism when they're looking at physical stores, one of your
stores, to go like, "This is a person that we actually shouldn't serve because this
is a person who
has a particular order or..."
Yeah. It would be up to
every franchisee or store owner to understand is
that person getting the help they need.
And we have resources to assist them with that, but we can't refuse service if they
are-
Not intoxicated
... not intoxicated or not showing impairment symptoms.
One final quick question is do you then train your current
workers on how to spot intoxication?
Mm-hmm.
Absolutely.
How then would that work for people who are delivering?
We don't know.
Because they're not present in delivery involved.
We don't know. We don't know.
We don't know.
I just want to ask you, because you're, I think, the only one who proposed it.
This-
There's currently nothing, no
... this-
Thank you
... restriction, 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
is it very--
Not so-- Do people start at 7:00, for instance, and do they go
to 11:00, 12:00 at night? Is that common?
Is there wide diversity or...?
Yes, there is.
There is.
So there's recent local alcohol policies like in Auckland and Canterbury-
Yeah
... Christchurch, where they've introduced the 9:00 p.m. closing.
Yeah.
That's in place right now.
But there are now surrounding districts that don't have that 9:00 p.m.
closing, and that's where people are crossing borders.
And do they commonly open till when?
Normally 11:00. 10:00 or 11:00.
And start earlier than 9:00?
Yes.
Mm-hmm.
Can do. Our stores don't, but grocers' do.
Okay, cool. Thank you. You're well over time.
Oh, well.
No, that's all good though.
Whether you're going to have to save it for the next-
Thank you.
But well, good stuff.
All right. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yes.
Thanks.
Thank you.
And go Waiuku.
We'll see.
Yeah. Right. Now, we're going back to the Ashburton Community Alcohol
and Drug Service. And I saw you there. Hey, Steph.
Kia ora.
See you. Hey, now we've got 10 minutes with you.
Perfect. Tena koutou katoa. As Andrew just
said, my name is Stephanie Poole. I'm the health promoter at Ashburton Community
Alcohol and Drug Services, or ACADS.
And this behind me is Leif Hansen, our CEO.
We thank the committee for the opportunity to speak today.
ACADS is a non-for-profit organization serving the Mid Canterbury
community since 1988. We support individuals and
whanau affected by alcohol and drug harm, and
rangatahi experiencing mental health challenges.
We oppose the majority of the amendments in this bill.
Alcohol is the most harmful drug in Aotearoa, and that's
evidence-based and proven by research.
The annual cost of alcohol-related harm is estimated at
$9.1 billion annually, and this is
primarily driven by low to moderate consumption across the
general population.
This bill increases availability across multiple fronts
simultaneously, and the evidence is clear that increased
availability leads to increased consumption, which leads to
increased harm.
Clauses four through 15 restrict who can object to license
applications, and introduces a right of reply that will
deter ordinary community members from raising legitimate
concerns-Undermining the intent of the 2023 Community
Participation Amendment Bill.
The one-kilometer territorial authority is unworkable,
particularly in rural communities where some properties
have driveways longer than a kilometer.
This is a very real situation for families such as
mine, who live in one territorial authority, but whose
tamariki attend school in another.
Families like mine would not be able to object to a license
near our children's school if this amendment bill passes.
Mana whenua whose rohe cross territorial boundaries will also
be silenced in direct conflict with Te Tiriti o Waitangi
obligations, and the loophole where a licensee can currently
hold a license in one territorial authority but
deliver in another, which is already happening in New Zealand,
remains unaddressed.
Clause 16 undermines local alcohol policies by shielding
existing license holders from renewal decisions based on the
LAP. LAP is a democratic process
that represents months of community consultation and community voice.
And while Ashburton District Council has never declined a renewal based on
LAP grounds, the ability to do so matters.
Removing it would create a two-tier system that advantages
incumbents over genuine community interests.
We oppose allowing clubs to hold on licenses.
Clubs often operate with volunteers, lower overheads, and cheaper
alcohol. A 330 mil beer, for example, at a
club can be as low as $5
versus $10 to $12 at an on-license premise.
Price is one of the most effective measures we have to
reduce harm, as has been identified by the World Health Organization.
Sports clubs, particularly in rural or isolated areas,
are often associated with higher rates of drink driving.
For example, in Ashburton, we have no public transport, no Uber or rideshare
options, and in combination with cheap alcohol and social
influence, this contributes to our drink driving rates.
In 2024, there were 133 people convicted of driving
under the influence in Mid Canterbury, which is more than two
people every week on our roads under the influence.
Mm.
On extended trading hours for televised events, evidence from the
2010 Law Commission report, commissioned by the government,
concluded that late-night alcohol availability increases heavy
drinking and harm, particularly among young people.
These clauses would also override relevant LAP and one-way
door policies that exist specifically to protect
communities and our emergency services.
We strongly oppose exempting hairdressers from licensing
requirements. There is no specified alcohol strength, no
training requirement, and only a $500 fine as a
deterrent in this bill. Hairdressers are no longer registered
or inspected following the removal of health hairdressers'
regulations in July of last year. This amendment represents
opening a door for other businesses to push for similar exemptions, as a
Queenstown helicopter company has already asked for.
We do support age verification and intoxication
checks for online alcohol delivery, and we do support
zero alcohol options being required alongside low alcohol
options at licensed premises. These are genuinely positive
measures that we would like to see extended to include
rapid delivery being no sooner than the next day, or
24 hours, and age verification at point of
sale, as well as on delivery.
$9.1 billion of alcohol-related harm isn't
just a number. It's tamariki, it's whanau, and it's
communities who are already experiencing alcohol-related
harm under the current act. Licensing restrictions does
not align with the purpose of the Sale and Supply Act, which is to
minimize harm. Thank you. We're happy to take any questions.
Right. Good. Thank you, Steph. We've got first question from Mr.
Tom Rutherford.
Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Steph,
for your submission. I'm keen to just get a bit of an understanding.
I appreciate you provide some support for
age verification for online sale and delivery.
Mm.
And those changes you are proposing around the rapid delivery, which
aligns with what Super Liquor have just shared with us around potentially a 24
hours or one-day stand-down period-
Mm
... between your order and then when it subsequently arrives.
But you don't support any of the other provisions in the proposed
act. I'm keen to know ultimately what would be the
best end goal for you and
the organization.
If you can sort of see where my line of questioning is
going.
In terms of rapid delivery, Alcohol Health Watch has done
some really great research around this, particularly in the Auckland and in
big cities. I think it's really important that we put
more provisions in place for online delivery.
As the previous submitter was alluding to, currently, there is
no need to prove your age
or intoxication level at the point of sale when you're doing an
online order or at delivery. And we know that it is
allowed and it is happening, that deliveries can be left unattended
at the door, so the person delivering that alcohol doesn't actually have to
see the person they're delivering to, which is very
different to going into an off-licensed premise where there are restrictions
around serving somebody who is intoxicated.
And so there is definitely room for more
legislation and more restrictions for rapid delivery to protect our
communities.
Okay. Right. We're going to Ms. Rima
Nakle.
Thank you. Thanks, and thanks for the great mahi that you guys continuously
do.
I want to talk about the opening the door with respect to
hairdressers and barbers having a drink.
Okay.
One side of the argument is that it's been happening for a very long time.
It already happens notwithstanding the current law.
But the other part of the spectrum for me is that if
someone is
a person that is struggling with alcohol addiction,
do you worry that
making it
available at different
beauty salons, et cetera,
can allow them to go deeper into their
addiction without having friends and family around to
see what's going on?
Absolutely. I think the
argument that people are already breaking the rule, so we'll just get rid of the
rule is really redundant.
But yeah, I don't know whether you have anything you want to add to that.
But I think just the opening or the loosening
and the increase of alcohol across all
aspects of life is never a good thing and
will absolutely increase harm. Do you have anything you want to say on that
one?
Yeah.
All right.
And exactly as you say, when it's just so
normalized-
Yeah
... it is really detrimental to people who are trying to make good decisions for
their health and for their community.
Right. Steph, we're out of time, but
Super Liquor suggested
a opening and closing time of 9:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m. You alluded to support about some
form of unification or uniformity.
If you were to specify hours, what would you be proposing?
I don't like to comment on something that would be kind of a blanket
rule, but I think that 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
feels like a sensible option if that's what we were talking
about.
Yeah, it was. Okay. Hey, fantastic.
Thank you for coming in, beaming in from sunny Ashburton,
no doubt.
Yes. It wasn't a frost this morning, so we're doing all right.
Oh, well, that's good. Okay. Thank you to both of you.
Thank you.
Right. Now, we're moving on to the Brewers Association.
Dylan Furze.
How are you?
Very well, thank you.
It's nice to see all these people turning up again to-
Mm
... on these different-
Topics?
Topics.
We're trying to fix one of those problems for you.
Right. We've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you. Look,
obviously, my submission was read, and I thank you for your time today,
Chair and committee. I guess I want to
focus on a couple of things first. I'll look at some of the key statistics in
New Zealand. So if we're looking at hazardous alcohol consumption in New
Zealand, has dropped 22% since 2020.
Binge drinking's down to 21% since
2020.
And at its point at the moment, it is currently
much lower than the OECD average.
We're seeing that youth drinking is down-
It's lower than the OECD average?
Yeah. By a third.
Even though we've always been miles above them.
We're by a third.
17% of New Zealand drinkers-
Whose stats are they?
What's that?
Minister of Health stats?
Minister of Health stats and WHO statistics from-
That's the revelation of the day.
I'm happy to share those with anybody if you would like.
Yeah. Well, it'd be good to get those.
Yeah, happy to share them. And look, so what
I'm trying to put in perspective is that this is a nation with a changing
consumption of alcohol. And so I don't say this to dismiss the
harm of alcohol. Obviously, that is truly real, and especially specifically for
some individuals.
But what I'm trying to look at is how we're trying to find a balance here with some
of the tighter regulatory controls that have come in from the last few years,
that have caused issues around things that we pointed out when the last
bill came through. Because a number of the things in this bill that we do support
actually are just taking it back to where the act was introduced in
2012.
And actually, from our perspective, there's a number of things that could be
changed that would support the industry a lot better that we find that there's
inconsistency across licensing across New Zealand.
And you'll hear it from a number of businesses.
So from an honest assessment of what this bill does and doesn't do.
What we're seeing is that the regulatory system is imposing lots of restrictions on
individual licensees who are having good operations.
People who have never put a foot wrong in their life,
but will be going through a hearing process, or they might be opening a
new business, and they have a proven track record in other businesses, where
they're not being able to do it for a year or 18 months because of the
hearing process. And it may be because they're seeing objections from
outside their community.
So we're really supportive of the changes that this bill makes.
It goes across a number of different things.
You're talking about hairdressers, you're talking about licensing conditions,
opening at different hours. So there's things in there also that tighten
regulations. We're talking about online delivery, and I think absolutely there's
some work to be done there for tightening restrictions that make it more
consistent, and we do support that.
What I think the bill gets right, in terms of objections, I think
bringing it back to your local community is really important.
We have seen objections coming from Auckland turned to cargo, and you'll hear it
time and time again from actual operators.
Obviously, from a brewer's perspective, we're talking about the customers that we
have that we sell through. So that's on-premise and off-premise.
And we've seen it coming back to us time and time again that they are finding it
difficult to just navigate what they do day to day because
they're being opposed from Auckland by a large group of online forums that don't
necessarily say where that person's from.
On a fundamental basis, that they don't support the business, the idea of
the business, not actual harms that the business may or may not
cause.You know, the idea around license renewals.
We support the ability for businesses to continue to
operate when there might be changes in their community around them.
This is something we see in the, um, Resource Management Act time and time again
with reverse sensitivity. You wouldn't want to move into a CBD
area right next to a bar and then start complaining about the noise.
Yeah.
I think what happens is with-
Oh, you do
... sensitive sites,
for say, a church or a school community opens
up down somewhere from a local bar or restaurant that's been there for a while, and
because the local alcohol policy then says, "They're a kilometer away, you
can't have your business anymore," is something to me that just feels fundamentally
unjust.
Mm.
And I think this bill does a great, um,
uh, thing to change that back.
Obviously, there's conditions that can be imposed on that business that might
mitigate some of those circumstances, and I think that's important.
One big one for us I'd like to point out is around the zero alcohol.
I think something that the brewers have been pointing out for a while is that, um-
Mm
... the requirement for all licenses to have
between 1.15% and 2.5% beer to satisfy some sort
of low alcohol need, um, has been changing with the
demographics of consumers.
So you're happy with the act?
I think so, yeah.
Or the bill?
Yeah.
I think so. So look, I think if
I-- there, there's more to do around conditions.
I would, I would, um, encourage you to look at some of the work that's been done by
the Minister for Regulation around the hospitality review, and some of the
potential recommendations they are doing are on
conditions. But happily open up for questions because-
I've gone through already.
Yeah.
Gee, they were just popping up.
I know. I thought I'd just go to it.
Didn't notice them. Right. First one, Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Thank you. I think the zero alcohol one I think is a no-brainer.
Like, that's actually just absurd that that...
Anyway, but just want to talk about the-- And it's great to have you back.
Obviously we-
Yeah
... talked about, um, we'll call them microbreweries, small brewers.
Mm.
And we obviously tried to do something when we were doing the cellar doors, but it
was quite, as you appreciate, was quite complicated.
Mm.
We're now trying to address that. Um, and so what
would that mean to some of your members if we can, um, kind of make that
exemption? And then you've actually got some very specific,
um, amendments too, just around the amounts,
right?
Oh, yeah.
So you kind of talk to these because this is quite a, um,
specialized area, but really important that we-
Yeah, sure. I mean, obviously, so from the Brewers Association perspective-
Yeah
... we represent the larger breweries in New Zealand.
Yeah. Yeah.
But obviously we're talking to, there are many breweries, there's about 200
breweries in New Zealand. A lot of them are regional and in local communities.
Some of them have the ability to serve food, and like the vineyards that you
would've heard about in the members bill, um, some of them don't.
So I think for them to be able to provide a taster to, um,
and charge for it make, just makes sense.
I mean, it's no different than a vineyard doing the same thing when produced on
site. Uh, in terms of sizings, I think that that might need to be looked
at. Um, but I think there's a recommendation around 50 mils within the
act. Um-
Okay. We're going-
Thank you
... Mr. Dan Rosewarne.
Thanks, Chair. Um, you support limiting, uh,
objections. Um, how do you balance
limiting object, objections with ensuring communities still
have a meaningful voice around licensing restrictions?
The one example I've got, you know, I might live and work outside a one-kilometer
radius-
Mm
... but my kids might walk past a bottle store, they might walk past a
brewery. They might even have a bus stop there.
Um, I feel that I should still be able to object.
I think the bill specifically says that it's with people within the territorial
authority, not just within the one-kilometer radius. Um, it's both.
Yeah.
So that's the way I read it. So-
A territorial-- I mean, I could be on a border of a territorial authority, um,
and could be in that same boat.
Well, I think that's one of the reasons why they have the one-kilometer element in
it, it's to be across the border as well.
Right.
So I mean, look, I support community participation in this, and I don't think
people shouldn't be able to have the voice.
Okay.
It's really important. I think the bill strikes a balance on that.
So if you're not within a-- If you're on a boundary and you're not within a
kil-kilometer, I think that's when there might be-
We've got a supplementary. Are you right, Dan?
So quick supplementary.
Yeah.
So do you think that the government's local government reform, where we're looking
to see amalgamation of territorial authorities will assist,
uh, with this for you?
Well, I think in terms of what he's talking about there and, and enlarging the fact
that footprints, you know, I live, I live in Wairarapa.
Um, I think it looks like that some of the, the territorial authorities will
combine there. So I imagine that someone from Masterton can probably object in
South Wairarapa when they wouldn't have been able to before, so.
Right. Now go to Dr. Sue Nagel.
Thank you.
That's right.
Um, one, one question of clarification.
Before, you said something about a brewery and, yeah, opening it at night and
creating noise, and something about fundamentally unjust.
Oh.
Can I just check what, just to clarify what you mean?
Sure. It was just around the reverse sensitivity issue.
So if you move into an area where there's existing
character of that area-
Yeah
... and then all of a sudden what you're doing is slightly different to that, and
you say, "Well, hang on a second, I don't want that anymore." It was more to do
with comparing it to a nightlife situation where someone moves in and
says, "Oh, it's loud here. I don't like it.
Can you please, you know, be quiet?"
So this is when there's already an established brewery.
You're not talking about opening a new one.
Mm. Yeah. That's right.
Okay.
It's, it was to do reflecting on the, the renewal licenses that may get opposed
because, uh, they-
Ah
... someone has established saying it can go out and-
Okay. That makes, that makes a lot of sense
... yeah, it was just an attack
'Cause the difference being with someone moving into an area which has a
particular character and then the, and then the residents objecting rather than
residents moving into that area and going like, "Oh, actually I don't like it
anymore."
Understood.
Okay. Great. Thank you.
So you're going to send us that report, please, to the committee?
Uh, yes. With the data.
Great.
I'm happy to do so.
Do that. That'd be fantastic. Thank you for your time.
Thanks for your consideration.
Thank you very much.
Right. New Zealand Indian Business Association, they're
available. Hello, Mr. Palmer.
A different member.
Nice to meet you again.
Good afternoon.
Uh.
We've got 10 minutes with you, I think. Yeah.
Uh, thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to speak today.
I've just got a short statement to make, and then really keen to just get into some
Q&A with you guys, um, assuming you've read our submission, obviously.
Of course
So I'm here on the behalf of New Zealand Indian Business Association.
We represent a broad cross-section of small and
medium-sized businesses across New Zealand, including many
owner-operated off-license retailers who are often
family-run businesses who are deeply embedded in their local
communities.
First, I want to acknowledge the intent behind this bill.
Alcohol regulation is an important area, and we
recognize the need to continuously improve systems
that reduce harm while maintaining fairness.
Our operators, members, already
are working in a highly regulated environment with
strict obligations around age verification,
refusal of service, staff training, and
licensing compliance. So our perspective today is
not one of resistance to regulation, but ensuring that
regulation is targeted, proportionate and effective.
Some of the key changes in the bill we broadly support include
limiting objections to those within one kilometer
of a licensed premises,
which will be a practical improvement, ensuring objections come from
those directly impacted rather than
distant or unrelated parties. We
support allowing licensed applicants to respond to
objections during hearings,
which is more about procedural fairness, giving businesses the
ability to correct misinformation, clarify facts,
and outline how they are addressing the concerns.
Providing more certainty around local alcohol policies
changes. It is unfair that an existing
business may get caught up into changes that come
forth, and they are running a business that's already compliant.
And we also support modernizing ID requirements to
include digital credentials, which reflect how
society is evolving and can
improve both efficiency and compliance.
Yep.
So that's kind of the gist of it. Yeah.
And then happy to do Q&A.
Right. Can I ask the first question?
So,
you've no doubt been listening, well, I think you have.
So the submission around having opening hours from 9:00
a.m. to 9:00 p.m.,
would your group of business owners support that as
well?
Yeah, definitely. And I think supermarkets should be brought in line as well.
I don't see why they should have a competitive advantage of selling alcohol from
7:00 a.m. then.
Okay, cool. Right. Anyone else?
Ms. Rima Nakley.
Hello. Thanks, Ash. Ash, so within the association that you
represent,
what ratio would you say are people that own businesses that
sell alcohol?
I don't know top of my head, but it'd be less than a quarter.
We do have a lot of manufacturing people as well, people who own gas
stations, and a lot of dairy owners as well.
And actually, in fact, a lot of doctors as well now. So, yeah.
Awesome.
Thank you.
All right, good. Hey, thank you-
Thanks, Ash
...
Ash, for your contribution.
Keep it up.
Right. Now, we're going to the mighty mountain,
Mount Ocean Sports Club
Incorporated.
It's on its way now.
Oh, I've got some questions for them.
Yeah. Thank you.
Thanks guys for coming.
Pay my membership.
Thank you.
Can I ask about troublesome members?
Yeah. That's fine.
Mr. Chapman, are you there?
Oh.
Yeah.
Can you see it? Oh, here we are.
Yes, we can.
Here we are.
Mr. Chapman, first of all I just acknowledge the giddy heights that you've
now moved into
from your former role.
And we are very concerned as a committee about the membership
of your organization.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Mr. Rutherford has declared an interest, of course. That's what I'm referring to.
Right. Pete, we've got 10 minutes with you.
Thank you very much. And so I'm-
I think you've done this before.
Yes. I'm Mike Chapman, but I'm joined by Sue D**e,
which is the manager of our club. And just a quick
word about the Mount Ocean Sports Club.
It's made up of the three local clubs, yacht, underwater, and
fish, and has about upwards 4,000 members.
And so we draw from the local community and we
basically run a club room.
And we do fundraising activities.
For example, today we're doing high tea for
breast cancer.
Ah, very, very good.
But-
Pity you didn't invite us.
Well, we'd happily invite you, but you probably can't get here.
We fully support-
You have to wear a pink tutu, though.
Yes, and be female.
So,
we really support this bill. It gives us more flexibility,
and that flexibility is really important as we service our
members and do fundraisers for the community and support the
community in many ways that we do with youth getting into
water activities, et cetera.
But what I thought I'd do, rather than me talk about it, is hand over to
Sue to talk about one of the practical impediments
we have with the current licensing system
So as we currently are a club license, you have to
be a member or a guest of a member or
belong to an affiliated club to come and use our
facilities. Or you can come for dinner, but you can't drink alcohol.
We
have a functions area upstairs, and we often have private functions
up there, which is fine.
I apply for a special license from the council for them.
That takes up to 20 working days to come through.
Sometimes, as you appreciate, some of our members or some people in the
community would like to use it for a memorial, and we
obviously don't have 20 working days to apply for our license around
that. Which makes it hard, because a lot of the local
people that want to use it for that type of thing, their
families have been here and used it, and
we sit over the water facing the mount.
And they want to farewell their loved ones, but they often can't because we don't
have time to apply for their license.
Another thing is, often we're down to the wire.
We've had several occasions where we apply for our
license within 20 working days or more,
generally more. And one example
last year was we had a Christmas party.
I applied for the license about 40 days
prior. It took 30 days to come through.
The function was due to start at 3:00, and I got it through at
12:30 that day. Which makes it hard,
because am I going to have to turn away the
company at the last minute because we don't have the license
come through?
And obviously we can't breach our license.
Of course.
One of the things we're thinking, Mr.
Chair, that could be helpful, especially around Christmas, is being able
to put in multi applications in one application for similar-
Oh, right. Okay, now, we've got two people who want
to put you on the rack.
The first one is Mr. Todd Stevenson.
Thank you, and thanks for being here.
Actually, I just want to dig in a bit more onto this on-license.
Because first, a quick question.
Obviously, being able to hire out your venues will be a revenue
raiser as well, right?
Yes.
So does that help with the viability of the club on an ongoing basis?
Yeah.
I think-
But it's not our sole purpose, though.
No.
Our sole purpose is really members. It's a supplement.
Yeah, totally get that. But I think all kind of clubs and community
organizations are always looking to make sure they can remain viable.
Absolutely.
And then as you outlined, and thanks for those great examples you gave of
when your facilities are used in an on-license, do you think there's some
way we could craft... Because I'm assuming what you're not going to do is then open
up full time as an on-license premise.
So I think the change that we want to achieve here is
totally sensible. I'm just wondering if there's a way where we could craft it so
that it is for exclusive functions or something of that
nature.
Does that make sense? So you get an on-license, but-
Yes.
Yeah.
Oh, I see. A sort of a hybrid club license.
Well, I'm just-
Yeah.
Well, not really. I'm just trying to think of a way.
Again, this is just for discussion, but because you're not wanting to open an
on-license all the time and have-
No, not at all
... Tom, D**k, and Harry come in. So yeah, I think we get
what we're trying to achieve here.
So I just wanted to see that you'd be comfortable-
Yes
... once we can deliver that.
Okay.
Okay. So
Dr. Lawrence Sun.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you so much for your submission and joining us today.
Can I just check, and this comes from a place
of ignorance. My assumption is that can you just get
an LCQ duty manager to come in, and that
will work
as well?
Would that-
No, not at all. We have to have a duty manager anyway.
Okay.
But we have to have, with the current rules, because we are a club
license-
Okay
... if you want to bring guests in, you have to have one member per
10 guests.
Okay.
And
hypothetically, if it's a memorial service for a member, you
might have two or three members, but that won't cover the size
of the group that may come for the memorial service.
So one member with LCQ per
10 guests.
No, not LCQ. One member of one of our clubs, like our
fishing, yachting, or underwater.
Okay. Yeah.
So-
And then we must have a duty manager on duty all times.
Anyway, that's okay.
Just going back to your multi
license application. So, you've got multiple Christmas
functions. I can imagine you're doing lots
of applications. So you're saying there's no provision under any of the
regulation or does
Mount Maunganui, well, Tauranga, whatever it is-
Tauranga
... Council, do they
only accept single license applications?
Single license, unless you're running a function like perhaps
fortnightly, we run bingo. So
if we were doing it for outside club members, we could do
one license for 15 bingo times. But
at Christmas, if we've got, say, 10
weeks in a row where we've got multiple functions booked, we need to do
10 separate applications for the
license for those people.
Okay.
So there's two ways around that one. One would be to be able to bundle up.
Like if you know you've got 10 coming up, you do one
application for 10 events, right?
Yeah.
Or the other option would be to do a quarterly application,
right, for up to 10 events.
Yes.
No doubt the council will want to charge you more for the single application.
Absolutely. But having said that,
they don't-
But either of those would work
... they don't charge you more for if you did 15 bingo nights.
They still just charge you the one amount for the 15 bingo nights.
All right.
Good. Hey, thank you both of you. You have a beautiful day in
Tauranga, I suppose you are, even though you're
on the borderline. But have a good... Thank you for your contribution.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
All right.
Bye-bye.
Bye.
When rate cuts come in, they'll charge more.
Yeah. Right, guys, we're going to go into private
session now.